                                                                                        NPHO, Weekly report 15 July 2026




       Weekly Epidemiological Report for West Nile Virus infection, Greece, 2026
                                  - 15 July 2026 -

This weekly epidemiological report aims to present an overview of the epidemiological data on West Nile
virus (WNV) human infection, the reported cases and the public health response to WNV in Greece for
transmission period 2026.

Data presented in this report are derived from the notifications of laboratory diagnosed human cases of
WNV infection sent to the Hellenic National Public Health Organization (NPHO) by the treating physicians
and from the daily communication with diagnostic laboratories: i) the National Reference Centre for
Arboviruses, Aristotelian University of Thessaloniki, ii) the Hellenic Pasteur Institute, iii) the Department of
Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Athens, iv) the Laboratory of Clinical Virology, School of
Medicine, University of Crete.

The Vector-borne Diseases Department of the Directorate for Epidemiological Surveillance and Prevention
of Communicable Diseases of the NPHO undertakes a verification procedure and investigates all reported
cases within 24 hours, through communication with the treating physicians and the patients, in order to
identify the probable place of exposure, the characteristics of the disease and the risk factors. In addition,
the health status/ outcome of hospitalized cases is daily updated.

In 2026 period, up to 15/07/2026, seven (7) laboratory diagnosed locally acquired cases of WNV infection
have been reported to NPHO, six (6) of which presented with neuro-invasive disease (WNND, encephalitis
and/or meningitis and/or acute flaccid paralysis) and one (1) case with mild symptoms (e.g., febrile
syndrome) (Table 1). No deaths have been recorded.

Table 1. Number of reported locally acquired cases of WNV disease, with and without central nervous
system (CNS) manifestations, Greece, period 2026, up to 15/07/2026

                                   Number of WNND cases -               Number of cases
                                                                                             Total number       Number of
                                           with                             without
                                                                                                of cases         deaths
                                    CNS manifestations [1]             CNS manifestations

 Number of WNV cases
 and deaths                                       6                               1                 7                0

1.   Refers mainly to encephalitis, aseptic meningitis and meningoencephalitis cases.




                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                         NPHO, Weekly report 15 July 2026

Figure 1 shows the reported WNND cases by week of symptom onset, in 2026, in the previous three
transmission periods (2023-2025) and in 2018, when the highest number of cases was recorded. For the
first diagnosed case of WNV infection for transmission period 2026 (case with WNND), the reported onset
of symptoms was on 25th June 2026 (week 25/2026).


Figure 1. Number of locally acquired reported WNND cases (with central nervous system manifestations)
by week of symptom onset, Greece 2018, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026, up to 15/07/2026 (n=6)1.




1. Lines represent the number of WNND cases in 2018, 2023, 2024 and 2025. Each blue box represents one laboratory diagnosed
case of WNND reported to NPHO in transmission period 2026.



The median age of WNND cases is 68 years (range: 62 - 86 years).

Table 2 shows the geographic distribution of the recorded cases with laboratory diagnosed WNV infection
at the level of probable Municipality of exposure. The patient’s probable place of exposure is a rough
indicator of WNV circulation areas.

According to a serosurvey conducted in 2010 by the NPHO and the National School of Public Health, at the
epicentre of the 2010 WNV outbreak in Central Macedonia, it was estimated that WNV neuro-invasive
disease develops in 1:140 infected persons.




                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                 NPHO, Weekly report 15 July 2026

  Table 2. Reported locally acquired cases of WNV infection (with and without central nervous system
  manifestations/ WNND) by probable Municipality of exposure, Greece, transmission period 2026, up to
  15/07/2026 (n=7)



                                                                                  Number of           Incidence of          Number
               Regional/ Metropolitan           Probable Municipality             cases with           WNND per              of cases
Region                                                                               CNS
               Unit                             of exposure                                              100,000             without
                                                                                manifestations        population(1)            CNS
                                                                                (WNND cases)                              manifestations

                                                Spata - Artemida                         2                 5,7                      0
               East Attica
                                                Markopoulo Mesogaia                      1                 4,6                      0
Attica
               North Section of Athens          Agia Paraskevi                           1                 1,6                      0
               North Section of Athens
               South Section of Athens          Glyfada                                  1                 1,1                      0

               Larissa                          Larissa                                  1                 0,6                      0
Thessaly
               Karditsa                         Palamas                                  0                  0                       1

Total Greece                                                                             6                0,06                      1
         1.   Calculations based on 2021 census data (Hellenic Statistical Authority).




                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                               NPHO, Weekly report 15 July 2026



PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES SUPPORTED BY THE NATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH ORGANIZATION, 2026

Aiming at the timely implementation of targeted response and prevention measures, in each transmission
since 2010, the NPHO continuously implements enhanced epidemiological surveillance of WNV infection,
immediately investigates the cases, informs health and public health professionals and is in constant
communication and cooperation with the competent national and local authorities. In March 2024, the
comprehensive "Action Plan for West Nile virus infection" was published, developed by the Ministry of
Health (MoH) in collaboration with the NPHO, with the aim of standardized implementation of actions to
reduce WNV transmission risk, based on a risk assessment. In more detail, the prevention and response
actions carried out by the NPHO -in collaboration with other stakeholders - include:

I. Enhanced surveillance for WNV infection in humans and communication for health professionals and
   stakeholders:
    • Enhanced surveillance for WNV infection in humans - Laboratory investigation of suspected cases
        - Awareness raising of physicians about the WNV infection: Testing for WNV infection in suspected
        cases (such as cases with encephalitis, aseptic meningitis, acute flaccid paralysis, fever of
        undetermined etiology) is recommended. The NPHO provides guidelines for the recognition and
        diagnosis of WNV disease and the recommended laboratory investigation (mailings and website
        www.eody.gov.gr). For the 2026 period, an informative letter was sent to all Health Units and
        Medical Associations of the country for vigilance regarding WNV, in May 2026. In addition,
        following the recording of cases in an area, local Health Units are urgently informed.
    • Daily communication and information exchange with laboratories conducting diagnostic testing
      for WNV (active laboratory-based surveillance).
    • Enhancing laboratory diagnosis of suspected cases, by supporting the National Reference Centre
      and other specialised diagnostic laboratories.
    • Case investigation: The Department of Vector Borne Diseases of NPHO undertakes the
      investigation of every reported WNV infection case within 24 hours after diagnosis, in order to
      determine the probable place of exposure, the risk factors and the severity of the disease. Health
      status of hospitalized cases is daily updated.
    • Communication - awareness raising of authorities:

    - Immediate update of stakeholders on the diagnosed cases (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Rural
       Development and Food, Hellenic National Blood Transfusion Center, Regions/ Directorates of
       Public Health and Social Welfare, Municipalities), and the recommended public health measures.
    -   Awareness raising before the onset of the 2026 transmission period: Information and guidance on
         WNV circulation risk assessment, surveillance, vigilance and enhancement of targeted prevention
         measures was provided to regional/ local authorities, before the onset of 2026 transmission
         season (in January 2026). In early April 2026, the NPHO informed the relevant regional authorities
         regarding the classification of all Municipalities in risk levels, based on historical surveillance data
         and in accordance with the criteria described in the Action Plan. In addition, the NPHO provided
         historical surveillance data (numbers of cases recorded in the previous years, by locality and year)
         to the regional authorities, in order to guide risk assessment and enhanced targeted prevention
         measures at local level, based on the Action Plan.
   •    Weekly surveillance reports on human WNV infection cases (uploaded on the NPHO website).
II. Communication and health promotion activities for the public: Informative material for the public
    regarding WNV infection and the recommended protective measures against mosquito bites is
                                                                                                                    4
                                                                             NPHO, Weekly report 15 July 2026

    available in the NPHOs website (https://eody.gov.gr). In 2026, the NPHO:
    • Published a Press Release (on 28th May 2026) regarding the expected recurrence of cases in the
      current transmission period, and the recommended prevention measures.
    • Published a Press Release (on 9th July 2026) regarding the diagnosis of the first case of WNV
      infection in 2026 and the recommended prevention measures.
    • Sent informative material (leaflets and posters) for the protection against mosquito bites and for
      WNV infection to regional public health authorities, in May - June 2026.
    • Sent -via email- informative material (leaflets) for the protection against mosquito bites and for
      WNV infection to regional and municipal authorities, in early July 2026.
    • Sent/ sends informative leaflets for the protection against mosquito bites to local authorities and
      Healthcare Units, in order to be distributed to the public.
    • In every affected area, informative leaflets and posters are urgently provided, if needed.
III. Coordination of an intersectoral “Working Group (WG) on the designation of affected areas by
     vector borne diseases” - Designation of affected and high-risk areas for implementing targeted blood
     safety and haemovigilance measures: This WG, under the MoH Committee for the Prevention and
     Management of Tropical Diseases, considers all available epidemiological and entomological data and
     decides on the characterization of affected and high-risk areas, assisting the targeted implementation
     of blood safety measures. In these areas, the Hellenic National Blood Transfusion Center issues
     guidance on blood safety. The list of affected and high-risk areas is also published on the NPHO’s
     website and updated regularly.
IV. Collaboration and exchange of information with the Ministry of Rural Development and Food
    (MoRD&F), which performs surveillance programme for the WNV infection in equids and wild birds.
    Following the information provided by the MoRD&F, the NPHO informs the relevant public health
    regional authorities regarding the WNV infection cases in animals and the recommended prevention
    and response measures.
V. Vector surveillance and control activities:

    Vector management programmes are performed under the responsibility of regional and municipal
    authorities. The MoH publishes an annual Circular on integrated mosquito management, action plan,
    and communication to the public. The “Action Plan for West Nile virus infection” of the MoH includes
    analytical guidance on vector management according to the risk level of each area.
    In addition, the NPHO performs supplementary actions for raising awareness of regional/ local
    authorities and active mosquito surveillance programmes nationwide:
    • Raising awareness and guidance to regional and municipal authorities for the timely planning,
      organization and implementation of integrated vector control programmes. For the 2026
      transmission period, NPHO sent relevant awareness letters to all relevant regional and municipal
      authorities, in January 2026 (including key steps to achieve timely implementation of the vector
      control programmes), and promptly informs local authorities of the affected areas regarding the
      cases and the recommended preventive and response measures (intensified mosquito control and
      communication campaigns for the local population).
    • Entomological surveillance: In the last years, the NPHO performs/ coordinates active mosquito
      surveillance programmes nationwide, in collaboration with several stakeholders and agencies, by
      placing mosquito traps in various areas throughout the country and testing of mosquito vectors for
      the presence of WNV, as an early warning and alert system. The mosquito surveillance data are
      directly available and accessible to the relevant regional authorities. Following the recording of
                                                                                                                5
                                                                              NPHO, Weekly report 15 July 2026

        WNV infected mosquitoes, the NPHO informs the relevant public health regional authorities, in
        order to implement targeted response measures.
        For the 2026 period, NPHO organizes an enhanced active mosquito surveillance programme, in
        collaboration with Universities and public Institutes (University of West Attica, Benaki
        Phytopathological Institute, Foundation for Research and Technology, MoRD&F’s Organization
        ELGO-Dimitra, Agricultural University of Athens, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, University of
        Thessaly, Democritus University of Thrace, University of Patras), including mosquito samplings,
        with standardized methodology and representative geographical distribution.
VI. Communication with international public health stakeholders: Frequent communication and weekly
    information exchange with ECDC (real-time reporting of the diagnosed cases in EpiPulse).


CONCLUSIONS

West Nile virus infection cases are recorded -on an annual basis- in many countries worldwide, including
many European countries. In 2010-2014 and 2017-2025, cases of West Nile virus infection were recorded in
various areas of Greece also, while WNV circulation has been recorded in all regions in the past. The
occurrence of human cases -on an almost annual basis since 2010- suggests that WNV has been established
in our country, as well as in other European and neighboring countries; thus, its circulation and the
recurrence of cases was considered likely and expected (in previously affected and in new areas) in the
2026 period (as in each transmission season). The NPHO informed (in May 2026) health professionals
nationwide for vigilance and awareness raising for the WNV diagnosis, and the public regarding the
expected recurrence of cases in the current transmission period and the recommended prevention
measures.
In 2026, up to 15/07/2026, human cases of WNV infection have been recorded in Greece, in six (6)
Municipalities, in five (5) Regional Units (NUTS3 level), in the Regions of Attica and Thessaly: in the Regional
Units of East Attica, North Section of Athens, South Section of Athens, Larissa, and Karditsa. It is expected
that more cases will be diagnosed in the country in the immediate future.
In the EU Member States and EU neighboring countries, in transmission period 2026, up to 08/07/2026,
human WNV infection cases have been also recorded -besides Greece- in: Italy, North Macedonia, Romania,
and Spain (source: ECDC, ECDC, Surveillance of West Nile virus infections in humans in Europe, weekly
report).
Epidemiological surveillance of the disease, systematic and early implementation of mosquito control
programs and personal protective measures against mosquito bites are considered the most appropriate
measures to control WNV infection outbreaks. Since the circulation of WNV and its geographical
distribution (i.e., the areas with recording of human cases) during each period cannot be predicted,
personal protective measures against mosquitoes are encouraged, during the period of mosquito
activity.
General information regarding personal protection measures against mosquitoes is available at:
https://eody.gov.gr/images/nosimata/metadotika/mosquito_brochure_2019.pdf.
National public health authorities conduct a series of preventive and response measures, including
enhanced surveillance, case investigation, information dissemination and communication activities, and
collaborate with regional and local authorities, aiming at the timely implementation of targeted response
measures at local level.

In addition, during the transmission season, weekly surveillance reports are published on the NPHO website
every Wednesday (available from: https://eody.gov.gr/el/nosimata/metadotika/nosimata-kai-themata-
ygeias/ios-dytikou-neilou.html?me=m3), in english also, which include updated information.
                                                                                                                   6
